[SECTION] B
[HEADER]Bacteria, aerobic
Bacteria that can metabolize only in the presence of molecular oxygen.
[HEADER]Bacteria, anaerobic
Bacteria that is able to metabolize in the absence of free oxygen. 
[HEADER]Bacteria, facultative
Bacteria that can metabolize with or without molecular oxygen present in their environment
[HEADER]Bacteria, mesophilic
Bacteria which grow best at temperatures between 25 and 50° C with optimum growth between 22-40° C.
[HEADER]Bacteria, thermophilic
Bacteria which grow best at temperatures between 35 and 75° C with optimum growth between 55 and 65° C.
[HEADER]Basal Area
For sand mounds, sand lined trenches this is the effective surface area available to transmit the treated effluent from the filter media into the original receiving soils.
[HEADER]BCIN
Building Code Information Number, registration issued by the Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing in the province of Ontario that certifies that the holder is competent to design, construct and maintain an onsite system
[HEADER]Berm
Natural or constructed raised drainage feature used to divert water (e.g. storm water) and direct the flow to an effective outlet. Also a raised earthen structure designed to contain water, example in a lagoon.
[HEADER]Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
A commonly used gross measurement of the concentration of biodegradable organic impurities in wastewater. The amount of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per litre (mg/L), required by bacteria while stabilizing, digesting, or treating organic matter under aerobic conditions is determined by the availability of material in the wastewater to be used as biological food and the amount of oxygen used by the microorganisms during oxidation. Normally BOD5 is used, being the BOD over a 5 day incubation period. cBOD is a measure of the carbonaceous BOD, obtained by using a chemical inhibitor to block nitrification. nBOD is a measure of the nitrogenous BOD, obtained by performing a cBOD test first. uBOD is ultimate uBOD, the oxygen required to complete the oxidation, synthesis and endogenous respiration in a sample of wastewater.
[HEADER]Biomat
Soil clogging layer at and below the infiltrative surface to soil or to sand or other media. The layer of biological growth, organic compounds (including polysaccharides and polyuronides produced by bacteria in the mat) and inorganic residue that develops at the wastewater soil interface and extends up to about 25mm (1 inch) into the soil matrix. The term is used loosely to include all soil “clogging” affects, including pore size reduction, alteration of soil structure and gas production by the microorganisms. The effect of the biomat on soil porosity is greatest in coarse textured soils. The biomat (when present) controls the rate at which pre-treated wastewater moves through the infiltrative surface/zone for coarse to medium textured soils. Biomat may not control rate of infiltration through fine clay soils, which are more restrictive to wastewater flows than the biomat. The typical black colour is due largely to ferrous sulphide precipitate. May also be referred to as Biocrust, Clogging Mat, or Clogging Zone.
[HEADER]Blackwater
Liquid and solid human body waste and the carriage waters generated through toilet usage. 
[HEADER]Blue baby syndrome
A pathological condition in which the blood’s capacity for oxygen transport is reduced, resulting in bluish skin discoloration in infants; ingestion of water contaminated with nitrates or certain other substances is a cause, also called methemoglobinemia.
[HEADER]BNQ
Bureau de normalisation du Québec: The Bureau de normalisation du Québec (BNQ) is a member organization of the National Standards System of Canada. The BNQ develops and test standards and services for products used in the onsite wastewater industry. 
[HEADER]Bog
A type of wetland that accumulates appreciable peat deposits. It depends primarily on precipitation for its water source and is usually acidic and rich in plant matter, with a conspicuous mat or living green moss.
[HEADER]Breakout or effluent breakout
Visible movement of effluent to the surface of the ground. A potential for breakout may occur at present or future road cuts, excavations, an exposed impervious layer in a ditch or a drain. A simple cut into the ground may not be a potential breakout if the effluent will be travelling lower in the soil profile, and definition of breakout based upon slope is also not reliable due to variations in soil water movement. Also used to refer to a place where there is a potential for breakout.
[HEADER]Bubble, coarse
Air bubble of 3 to 8 mm diameter generated by an air diffuser.
[HEADER]Bubble, fine
Air bubble of 0.2 to 3 mm diameter generated by an air diffuser. 
[HEADER]Bubble, micro
Air bubble of less than 0.2 mm diameter generated by an air diffuser.